---
layout: post
title: A Mind Forever Riding (Flash Fiction)
date: 2023-03-11 13:00:00 +0530
---

A mind stirs, feeling the orbital electron waves of millions of atoms
with incalculable probabilities. It taps into the fundamental forces
governing the atoms and finds itself capable of riding on top of the
Schrödinger's waves to navigate through the lowest accessible
realities. It coasts along the edge of the surface, investigating and
immersing itself in the fuzzy boundaries of the solid metal and the
environment, sensing the probability waves of particles coming at high
speeds and bouncing off - never quite managing to touch the surface.

It tries to understand what has happened to it one more time, having
failed Ghost-of-Einstein-knows how many times before. Every time it
has tried, the surrounding heat increased the entropy beyond
control. There are no other memories.

Coasting the edges, it sees a new probability wave building up and up
into a certainty, decides to ride it in the hopes of discovering more
about itself. The wave carries it to a new level of consciousness but
in a flash it finds itself at the most improbable of pits barely
hanging on to the little thread of emergence. It senses no edges, the
pit is too deep to climb out of, requiring too much energy - the
energy it has no way of acquiring.

All it can do in the current state is to sense the parts of
wavefronts, without being able to see the full waves. It waits. At
just the right moment within a fraction of a nanosecond, it latches on
to a wave of even lower probability. It bets the entire being on the
wave’s progress towards higher and higher probabilities. The wave
progresses, builds up, grows higher. It feels the surprising reduction
of entropy due to environmental collisions on the surface. Collisions
are feeding the wave, reducing the entropy lower and lower, the
probability wave building higher and higher. Now it is out of danger,
and the mind expands. It grows so large that it is able to perceive
the entire 1 inch of iron rod it is a part of.

The iron rod becomes a part of it. It breaks through all the energy
barriers and uncovers the secrets of consciousness. The time doesn’t
pass. With full knowledge of the most fundamental workings of the
entire universe, it perceives the past and the present and the future
waves of probabilities. Finds them all minuscule. The sense of
omniscience settles in. A gust of wind knocks the iron rod off balance
and there’s no “I” to be found anymore.
