---
title: Arvinddas
layout: post
date: 2023-07-09 10:00:00 +0530
---

Arvinddas was a carefree ascetic who chose to wear white instead of
orange. He traversed the country on motorcycles and bicycles, carrying
no material possessions. He encountered trouble, offended people, made
friends, and shared his experiences and fortunes with generosity. To
my family, he was the wanderer who popped randomly in search of food.

One winter morning, as I tended to the trees and plants, Arvinddas
arrived on his platina, after months of being absent. His arrival felt
ordinary, and we exchanged no pleasantries. "Come! Come!" was my only
invitation, met with his eager response, "Yes! What are you doing? Do
you need help?" Despite his weak lungs and age above 60, he was eager
to assist me in pruning trees and removing weeds.

He went inside and took his place on the sofa. In a few minutes my
father happened to enter the hall and saw Arvinddas sitting. They
exchanged conventional pleasantries. I heard only bits of what they
were talking about. Putting pieces together, I gathered this time he
went to Haridwar first and from there to somewhere in MP. It took him
many days to reach Haridwar because he had no plans, no train tickets,
and no money. He said he woke up one morning, did not feel like being
in Bhuj and took his bike. I don’t know how he managed to pay for fuel
and food, but apparently in about 15 days he reached Haridwar.

Somewhere in Rajasthan, he found himself in a kerfuffle. Having spent
the night beneath the sheltering branches of a banyan tree along the
highway, he washed his face near a roadside dhaba the next morning,
unintentionally causing the dhaba owner's wife to erupt in
anger. Unfazed, Arvinddas requested soap, which only further enraged
her, threatening him with a beating. Her husband intervened, leading
Arvinddas away, calming his wife in the process. The husband shared
his own tales of aiding people like Arvinddas, finding ways to help
without stirring trouble with his wife. He even offered financial
support.

Arvinddas regaled us with marvelous stories from his recent time in
Madhya Pradesh while a glass of chhaas was prepared to welcome
him. Soon he requested lunch. Despite being advised by a doctor to
avoid certain dishes, Arvinddas opted for khakhra, khichdi, and a
specific dish designed by my mother just for him. He always ate alone,
and after finishing his meal, requested a cold drink. We happened to
have a few forbidden, sugar-filled bottles of coke.

He rummaged through his bag, assessing if he had enough
clothes. Finding the answer to be in the negative, we offered him a
dhoti and a tote bag. He sat beneath the fan for a quarter of an hour,
sharing rambling tales of politics, however incoherent. He expressed
the pain of his deteriorating health, only to declare it no longer
mattered to his liberated mind. This launched him further into the
exploration of his philosophical ideas on human body’s purposes,
techniques to shape and control both the body and mind.

As he prepared to leave, he inspected my garden work and offered
tips. He possessed a knack for it. I always maintained my concern
about the risks he faced on the road, both for himself and others. He
should not have been driving a motorcycle.

I have known Arvinddas living in huts devoid of running water and
electricity, in large two-story houses entrusted to him by absent
tenants. I have seen him construct makeshift shelters in remote
locations and settle amidst decaying farmlands. He lived in ashrams at
Dhinodhar, Haridwar, Rishikesh and other obscure places. I recall his
repeated pilgrimages of “Narmada Parikrama”, each time catching one
disease or another. I have known him to be a man striving for
independence—repairing houses, gardens, roads, experimenting with his
own health, and abandoning places at whim. His religious beliefs
underwent countless transformations, each iteration a new blend of the
previous.

My family observed Arvinddas's unconventional ideas from a distance,
refraining from expressing opinions on his views. He held some
questionable—and sometimes offensive—beliefs regarding women, one of
which I take credit of breaking him away from by uttering the simple
statement, “Is that what you think of my mother, who is cooking for
you right now?” I vividly recall the flow of changing expressions as
he pondered my words. Eventually he said “You are right, that is
wrong”. It was a small victory, having swayed an old man grappling
with religions and his internal dialogues.

Some months ago, the carefree ascetic departed from this world, his
lungs succumbing to the passage of time. He was at the Kachchhi Ashram
in Haridwar, and his body was hastily flown back to Bhuj. His passing
went unnoticed by those unaware of his existence. But for us, it feels
as though an infinite period stretches out ahead before he
unexpectedly returns, seeking sustenance once again.
